Extreme Heat as the New Normal: A Methodological Roadmap for Behaviour, Physiology, and Species Distributions


A defining feature of ongoing rates of anthropogenic climate change is the increasing frequency, intensity, and severity of extreme weather events. Among them, extreme heat is recognized as a critical driver of ecological and evolutionary change. Yet its integration into organismal biology remains limited, in part because heatwaves are difficult to define consistently and are not part of standard climatological or biological toolkits. Short periods of extreme heat can exceed physiological limits more than future mean temperature projections, restructure geographic ranges, and accelerate extinction risk. Here, we present a methodological framework for incorporating extreme weather into studies of behavior, physiology, mechanistic niche modeling, species distribution modeling, and population dynamics. We provide examples and accompanying code to obtain extreme temperature metrics at hourly scale and long-term climatological resolutions. First, we outline reproducible approaches for defining and quantifying extreme heat events. Second, we present a species distribution model that incorporates metrics of extreme heat for the California Quail (Callipepla californica) showcasing improvements in habitat suitability, particularly at range edges where species are vulnerable. Third, we integrate high-resolution microclimate modeling with biophysical simulations to quantify exposure and thermal stress of sleepy lizards (Tiliqua rugosa), allowing precise estimates of body temperatures during heat events across microclimates. Finally, we provide an example of population modeling that embeds the history of thermal exposure, demonstrating how extreme heat drives unexpected risks of population collapse and individual mortality. This integrative framework offers a methodological roadmap and open code for anticipating organismal responses and refining vulnerability assessments. As heatwaves intensify, incorporating their dynamics is essential for understand ecological and evolutionary change, designing experiments across species’ geographic ranges, and supporting conservation in a rapidly warming, and more unpredictable, world.

many_thresholds_extreme_heat_centroids.R: Calculate thresholds of extreme heat at a centroid location based on multiple thresholds. Washington state example

data_update_ebird: Prep data for SDM for california quail
modeling_ranger_extremes_breeding.R: Build SDM for california quail

extreme_temperature_sleepy_lizzard: Plot the output of the sleepy lizzard microclimate model

AutocorrPopDynamics.nb : this is the Mathematica file that I used to generate all the subfigures in Fig 4. It can either (1) run exactly as is to generate similar outputs as shown in Fig 4 (they won't be exactly identical, because the time series generation is stochastic); (2) adjusted slightly to import the exact time series from Fig 4 (needed code is commented out and annotated); or (3) adjusted to play with different temperature distributions and levels of autocorrelations, or adjusted to import different TPCs and temperature time distributions/series (I included a pdf version of this file as well, so that it is readable to anyone who doesn't have Mathematica access; I typically include these in GitHub repos for accessibility).
autocorrpopdynamics.Rmd : this is an R version of the Mathematica file. It doesn't generate the exact subfigures I included in the manuscript (because I am quite bad at coding in R and it was much easier for me to do in Mathematica), but it does include all the functions needed to generate the same dynamics. I included a bit at the end as an example of how to import actual TPCs and climate data, with instructions for where to get the climate data that I plot for the example (html included as well).
exampledata.csv : csv of the exact series plotted out in Fig 4. Columns are 'temps1' (the random temperature series plotted in 4c), 'data1' (pop dynamics under random noise plotted in 4f), 'temps2' (pink noise temperature series plotted in 4d), and 'data2' (pop dynamics under autocorrelated noise plotted in 4g).
SICBfig4.png : high-res version of the figure in the main doc. I generated subfigures from the Mathematica file and combined them in Illustrator; any small edits are quite easy to make in this format, so please let me know if you see anything now that you want changed. The attached version is already in the google doc as well.
